---
title: 'Advent of Code 2022 Days 6-10 in Rust and Haskell'
date: 2022-12-11
permalink: /posts/2022/12/aoc-6-10/
tags:
  - rust
  - haskell
  - aoc
  - advent of code
---

I've given up following the narrative. There's some kind of receiver and some beacons and maybe still some monkeys? I don't know. The puzzles have gotten more challenging, more interesting, and more time-consuming.


## General Observations

Algebraic data types have been the hero of the past set of puzzles. For example, to solve [Day 15](https://adventofcode.com/2022/day/15) I relied heavily on the function with signature

```rust
fn find_col(sensors: &Vec<Sensor>, row: i64, min: i64, max: i64) -> Option<i64> {
// ...
}
```
including unpacking it in a kind of iterative function with

```rust
for row in min..=max {
    match find_col(sensors, row, min, max) {
        Some(x) => return x * 4000000 + row,
        None => {},
    }
}
```

Probably the king of algebraic data type puzzles, though, was [Day 13](https://adventofcode.com/2022/day/13). This had us parsing nested sequences like

```
[[1],[2,[3,4],5]],6]
```

and comparing them. In a strongly typed language, there's really only one way to handle this, which is with a kind of recursive type:

```rust
enum NestedList {
    Number(usize),
    List(Vec<NestedList>),
}
```

Solving the puzzle involved a lot of recursion, which is fine. It did raise a philosophical question: *if my goal is to learn these languages, is it better for me to do this parsing by hand (as the puzzle presumably intends) or should I use a library that does it for me?* The argument for using a library (like `serde`/`serde_json` for Rust) is that these types of text parsing problems are quite common in practice, and so *practical knowledge* of Rust must include knowledge of these parsing libraries. On the other hand, I'd be losing out on the hands-on experience with this kind of recursive typing if I let a crate do all the heavy lifting for me. I ended up dong it by hand in Rust, then getting annoyed and giving up in Haskell.

## Rust Reflections

I'm still not 100% sold on all of Rust's promises. Typing 

```rust
my_vector.iter().map(|x| ...).collect()
```

several times per program has me wondering at the necessity of the `.iter()` and `.collect()`. Also, why does the compiler have such a hard time inferring types from these kinds of expressions? It can infer the type of the function in the `map`, and it knows the type in the iterable already, and it knows I'm starting with a vector... shouldn't it be obvious? Like, if I have a function

```rust
fn my_func(a: A) -> B
```

and a vector `my_vector: Vec<A>`, then surely

```rust
my_vector.iter().map(|x| my_func(x)).collect()
```

is `Vec<B>`. Not to pile on the hate, but why can't I just do

```rust
my_vector.iter().map(my_func).collect()
```

The analogous code in Haskell is literally

```haskell
map myFunc myVec
```
## Haskell Reflections

If it's not clear by now, I really enjoy the succinctness of programming in Haskell. My solutions are often half the length of their Rust counterparts, and I've even stopped making deliberately obtuse one-line functions! My greatest Haskell triumph so far is my solution to [Day 12](https://adventofcode.com/2022/day/12), which was a graph search. I've seen it often expressed that Haskell is not a great language for BFS, but behold the following code.

```haskell
pathLength :: Map.Map (Int, Int) (Int, Int) -> (Int, Int) -> (Int, Int) -> Int
pathLength parents start end
    | end == start = 0
    | otherwise = 1 + pathLength parents start (parents Map.! end)

bfs :: [String] -> (Int, Int) -> (Int, Int) -> [(Int, Int)] -> Map.Map (Int, Int) Bool -> Map.Map (Int, Int) (Int, Int) -> Maybe Int
bfs graph start end [] seen parents = Nothing
bfs graph start end (q:queue) seen parents
    | q == end = Just (pathLength parents start end)
    | otherwise = bfs graph start end (queue ++ z) (Map.union seen (Map.fromList [(z', True) | z' <- z])) (Map.union (Map.fromList [(z', q) | z' <- z]) parents)
    where z = filter (\x -> not $ x `Map.member` seen) (validNeighbors graph q)
```

BFS in 5 lines, and the path length calculation in just 3 more! More amazing still is the fact that I wrote this code *as is* and it compiled and executed flawlessly on my first try. It would be even simpler if I'd bothered to use a hashset instead of a hashmap for holding visited nodes. Actually, the `validNeighbors` function is the longest bit of code in the entire program:

```haskell

validNeighbors :: [String] -> (Int, Int) -> [(Int, Int)]
validNeighbors graph (x, y) = filter (\(x', y') -> elevation (graph !! x !! y) >= elevation (graph !! x' !! y') - 1)[(x', y') |
   x' <- [x - 1 .. x + 1],
   0 <= x', x' < length graph,
   y' <- [y - 1 .. y + 1],
   0 <= y', y' < length (head graph),
   x' == x || y' == y, (x', y') /= (x, y)]
```

Is it all good with Haskell? Alas, no. In addition to multiple annoyances related to iterating through lists, I had a spectacular failure on [Day 14](https://adventofcode.com/2022/day/14). Ultimately, my code ran and got the right answer, but it took nearly a minute (i.e., nearly a minute longer than my Rust code took). I don't know for sure what the problem is, but my best guess is that it has something to do with lazy evaluation and tail recursion. There are some known self-owns in Haskell, like the `foldl` function, which causes massive memory overflows because the program ends up storing a ton of unevaluated expressions. Probably something like that is happening in my Day 14 code, but I'm not sure where.

All my solutions can be found in my [github repo](https://github.com/jmkopper/Advent-of-Code-2022/)
