---
title: 'Advent of Code 2022 Days 6-10 in Rust and Haskell'
date: 2022-12-11
permalink: /posts/2022/12/aoc-6-10/
tags:
  - rust
  - haskell
  - aoc
  - advent of code
---
de
The elves are on their expedition. They're building tree houses and tossing people into rivers. A computer was involved somehow. We approached this with both Rust and Haskell.

## General Observations

- Each challenge has two components, but both use the same input. This means you have some opportunity to write your code very flexibly for the first component and have a realistic hope of reusing it for the second.
- I'm always doing the Haskell after the Rust, which makes the Haskell coding very fast. I know exactly what I need to do and I don't need to worry about what might happen in the second component.

## Rust Reflections

The borrow checker really ruined my day once during this set. [Day 7](https://adventofcode.com/2022/day/7) involved modeling a file system directory tree, and it turns out trees are super annoying to implement in Rust. For example, you might try to do something like this:

```rust
struct TreeNode {
  data: i32,
  children: Vec<&TreeNode>, // Will not compile!
  parent: &TreeNode,
}

struct Tree {
  nodes: Vec<&TreeNode>,
}
```

Already there's an issue: Rust says it has no idea how *big* a `TreeNode` is, and therefore doesn't know how to allocate memory for it. Ok, so you have to use something like `Box` or `Rc`. No big deal, right? Well, you also can't do stuff like

```rust
fn add_node(parent: &mut TreeNode, data: i32) {
  let new_child = TreeNode { data: data, children: vec![], parent: &parent };
  parent.children.push(&new_child);
} // new_child goes out of scope
```

because the `new_child` data goes away at the end of the function. Again, you can fix this with tricky implementations with `Rc` or whatever. Anyway, I ended up choosing a completely different method of representing a tree in Rust, which also happens to work well in Haskell. The idea is that the `children` field in the `TreeNode` only keeps track of some _indicies_ for its children. The `Tree` keeps track of the association between index and node. Something like this:

```rust
struct TreeNode {
  data: i32,
  children: Vec<i32>,
  parent: i32,
  id: i32,
}

struct Tree {
  nodes: Vec<TreeNode>,
}
```

Now adding a node involves pushing it onto the `Tree.nodes` field and updating its parent by pushing its `id` into the parent's `children` vector. I used the index of the node in the `nodes` vector as its index to easily keep track of them. Here's what I ended up implementing.

```rust
struct DirectoryNode {
    name: String,
    parent: Option<usize>,
    children: Option<Vec<usize>>,
    files: Option<Vec<usize>>,
    id: usize,
}

impl DirectoryNode {
    fn size(&self) -> usize {
        match &self.files {
            None => 0,
            Some(x) => x.iter().sum(),
        }
    }
}

struct FileTree {
    cwd: usize,
    nodes: Vec<DirectoryNode>,
}

impl FileTree {
    fn new_child(&mut self, parent: usize, child_name: String) {
        let new_idx = self.nodes.len();
        self.nodes.push(DirectoryNode {
            name: child_name,
            parent: Some(parent),
            children: None,
            files: None,
            id: new_idx,
        });

        match self.nodes[self.cwd].children {
            Some(ref mut y) => y.push(new_idx),
            None => self.nodes[self.cwd].children = Some(vec![new_idx]),
        };
    }
}
```

Because the tree owns all the nodes, there's no issue with bad references or reference lifetimes. Obtaining a node is as easy as `tree.nodes[index]`. The only real modification here is that because of the parameters of the problem, I never had to update a node that wasn't the current working directory, so I kept the index of the cwd as a data field in the tree.

## Haskell Reflections

I have given up writing Haskell one-liners. The last one was the glorious [Day 6](https://adventofcode.com/2022/day/7) solution:

```haskell
module Main where
import Data.List( nub )

main :: IO ()
main = do
    rawData <- readFile "input.txt"
    let n = 14
    print $ head (filter (\y -> nub (take n (drop y rawData)) == take n (drop y rawData)) [1..length rawData - n]) + n
```

Ok, not technically one line, but you can see pretty easily how to make it one line.

For reasons related to time and lack thereof, I haven't done all of the recent challenges in Haskell. I am still enjoying it when I do use it, but I am starting to have complaints about the tooling surrounding Haskell. For example, there's _two_ package managers: stack and cabal.

I have cabal installed, so that's what I've been using, but it's causing its own set of issues. In order to add a dependency to a project, you need to update the .cabal file. This is already annoying. I'd prefer if I could do `cabal add <package name>` or something and have it do that work for me. But whatever. Then once the project has the dependency added, the rest of the tooling, like the linter, seems to break. I then have to restart VS Code, sometimes more than once, to get everything going again.

For this reason I've found it easier to just globally install the packages I need, which is not a great practice, but I feel forced into it. Also, surely tools like `HashMap` should be part of the base Haskell installation. So maybe it's not terrible that I've added them globally.

All my solutions can be found in my [github repo](https://github.com/jmkopper/Advent-of-Code-2022/)
